Welcome to the perspective unit of
the second week in Nand to Tetris.
During this week we built an ALU.
And in the next week we're going
to put this ALU on the side and
focus on building some memory
systems leading up to a RAM unit.
But this,
this is something that we'll do next week.
Let us now look back and bring up
some questions that typically come up
when we talk about combinational logic and
ALU design.
The first question is,
we've already built about 20 chips in
this course, are these chips standard?
Namely, are they typically being used
in many other computer systems, or
are they specialized to the computer that
you built in this particular course.
Noah?
>> Most of the gates that we build in
the course are completely standard.
The half adder, the full adder, the adder.
These gates are completely standard,
as are the gates we built last week,
like the multiplexor the or
Xor gates and so on.
What is not completely standard is
our ALU, which is extremely simple.
In this course we clearly emphasize
simplicity over almost anything else,
because we want to fit
everything into one course.
So for that reason our ALU is extremely
simplified in its implementation, and
in the respect it's a bit
unique among usual ALUs.
>> The next question is directly
related to the previous one and
the question is how come
the allele that we built
does not feature more operations
like multiplication and division.
Well the answer is that indeed
there is no problem to write HDL
code that specifies chips that
carry out multiplication and
division by operating directly
on zeroes and ones, on, on bits.
And in fact, there are some very elegant
and very nice algorithms to do just that.
But in general, when you build
a computer system the overall
functionality that the system provides
is divided between the hardware and
the operating system
that runs on top of it.
So, it is the designers freedom
to decide how much functionality
to put in each one of these layers.
When we design the heck computer
which is the computer that will
continue to build in the course.
We decided, as Noam explained before,
that the ALU will be extremely simple.
And that operations like division and
multiplication will be
delegated to the software that
runs on top of this computer.
And indeed, in the second part of this
course, in Nand to Tetris part two,
we are going to design among other
things an operating system, and
the operating system will
have several libraries and
one of these libraries is gone,
is going to be called math.
And the math library will feature
all sorts of of very useful
mathematical operations including
multiplication and division.
So at the end of the day
the programmer who
writes programs that have to run on this
computer will not feel the difference.
The programmer will not really
care if certain algebraic
operation is being done by the operating
system or by the hardware.
It will be completely transparent for
the high level programmer.
But of course there's
there's some tradeoff here.
And typically when you design
an operation in hardware
typically it runs much faster but
it's costly to design and
it also costs money to manufacture
the the more complex hardware unit.
So once again it's a matter of tradeoff,
cost effectiveness.
And that's how we decided to
build the the heck computer.
Simple ALU and many extensions later
when we build the operating system.
We hope that we convinced
you that the ALU that we
designed in this course is indeed simple.
And now the next question is is
this ALU actually efficient?
>> Almost everything that we did in the
construction is completely efficient, so
you really can't say much more.
But there is one component which is where
some important optimization is still
possible, and it's probably worthwhile to
talk for one second about the kinds of
optimizations that we're talking about,
and this is the adder.
So let us see what is the main
problem with the adder and
how one may,
may decide to improve upon it.
So let us recall
the implementation of the adder.
The adder was constructed with
a sequence of full adders inside it.
[NOISE] Each full adder got some inputs
from the input of the adder gate,
and then the important thing
that one of its output's
carry went on to the next adder,
the next full adder.
Similarly, the outputs are carried from
this full adder went down to this full
adder and so on.
Okay.
So this chain of connections is really the
problematic one that one may wish to op,
wish to optimize.
So let us look at the distance,
if you wish.
How many gates must the signal,
signal traverse between the input and
the final output of the last full adder?
It needs to go inside
the first full adder,
go through a few gates,
then go here through another few gates.
Again, another through,
few gates and so on.
So assume that there are, like,
three or four gates in each full adder.
If this is, say,
a 32-bit full add, 32-bit adder,
altogether we have 32 bits times 3 or
4 bits of delay from input to output.
And when you actually run
the such hardware in a system you
will have to take this delay into account
because it actually takes time for
the single to perverse for all
the capacitor to the capacitors and then
implementation of all these full adders
to actually completely a load and so on.
So having such a long chain
is not considered a good
thing because it actually
increases the delay.
So what could you do instead?
Really, if you want to shorten the chain
then maybe you can compute this
thing, the carry that goes into one of the
full adders at the top, it's, it's a most
significant bits, computed in a different
way, not throughout this long chain.
And in fact if you actually look
at the logic that's computed here
there are more efficient ways,
ways that have less delay.
And what you could do is do
what's called carry look ahead.
Compute this carry independently
of this long chain so that
may duplicate if you wish some effort,
but at least you're minimizing delay.
So instead of just having the carry
be computed by this long chain,
have the carry be computed separately for
each one of the full adders and
the least delayed way possible.
And that is called carry look ahead and
that would allow you to run this
chip at a much faster rate
because the delays are shorter.
>> All right, moving along.
The last question that we want to focus is
why do you recommend using built-in chips
in project two instead of the chips
that we actually built in project one?
Well first of all you're welcome
to use the chips that you built.
You know,
we definitely don't prevented and
its it makes a lot of sense to use
the chips that that you actually
build because this is what
this course is all about.
We are building a complex machine which
consists of various layers of construction
and it is perfectly reasonable that
when you build a certain layer
you will use layers that you built before.
However there are very good
reasons why you should want to
use built in chips that we supply rather
than the chips that you've built yourself.
And the most important of these reasons
is the notion of we can
call it local failures.
And the idea is that if you build,
I'm sorry,
if you use built-in chips as
your chip arts, and some and
some problem raises its ugly
head in the present project,
then you are guaranteed that this
problem can be attribute to bugs and
problems that were created in this project
only, and not in previous projects.
So, this is also sometimes called
the notion of unit testing.
You test each unit separately
from the rest of the system.
And this principle of unit testing
goes hand in hand with other
very important principles like
obstruction and modularity.
And taken together, you know, one of these
things that these principles imply is that
once you've finished building
a certain module you can put it away.
You can stop worrying about its
implementation and use only
the interface or the API of this module
when you build more complex functionality.
This really is the only way
to manage complex projects.
And by adhering to these principles which
we find extremely important by doing so,
we can really take this super-ambitious
project of building a modern
computer from first principles and
do it only in seven weeks.
>> Shimon?
>> Yes.
>> I think we should also confess
that our simulator is not that efficient,
especially when we get to
more complex projects,
if you actually layer the chips that
were constructed in previous projects,
our simulator will have to face a huge
number or arrays and will simply be slow.
If you do it using just the, the finished
end of the previous chips, just the,
the specifications of the previous chips,
then our simulator will be fast and
nice to work with.
>> Yes.
In fact that's
another very important technical reason
why we want to use built-in chips and
this problem will come up later in the
course when we build memory systems and
more complex functionality.
And indeed this is a very
good other reason why
it makes a lot of sense to use
software based built-in chips.